Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tica20
International Journal of Cartography
ISSN: 2372-9333 (Print) 2372-9341 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tica20
Simplification of polylines by segment collapse:
minimizing areal displacement while preserving
area
Barry J. Kronenfeld, Lawrence V. Stanislawski, Barbara P. Buttenfield & Tyler
Brockmeyer
To cite this article: Barry J. Kronenfeld, Lawrence V. Stanislawski, Barbara P. Buttenfield & Tyler
Brockmeyer (2019): Simplification of polylines by segment collapse: minimizing areal displacement
while preserving area, International Journal of Cartography, DOI: 10.1080/23729333.2019.1631535
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23729333.2019.1631535
Published online: 30 Jul 2019.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 30
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Simplification of polylines by segment collapse: minimizing
areal displacement while preserving area
Barry J. Kronenfeld
a, Lawrence V. Stanislawski
b, Barbara P. Buttenfield
c
and Tyler Brockmeyerb
aDepartment of Geology and Geography, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL, USA; bU.S. Geological
Survey, Center of Excellence for Geospatial Information Science, Rolla, MO, USA; cDepartment of Geography,
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
ABSTRACT
This paper reports on a new Area Preserving Segment Collapse
(APSC) algorithm for simplifying polygonal boundaries while
preserving the polygonal area at simplified target scales and
minimizing
areal
displacement.
A
general
segment
collapse
algorithm is defined by iteratively collapsing segments to Steiner
points in priority order, guided by placement and displacement
functions. The algorithm is specified by defining functions that
minimize areal displacement under the constraint that the areas
of adjoining polygons are preserved exactly. Self-intersections can
be avoided by testing for intersections with two new line
segments associated with each segment collapse operation. The
paper demonstrates simplification results for a sample of 10 lakes
formed from alpine, Karst, glacial and arid desert processes as well
as artificial dams. APSC results are compared with three other
simplification routines and evaluated for area preservation, linear
and areal displacement, complexity and introduction of boundary
self-intersections.
Results
confirm
that
the
APSC
algorithm
preserves area exactly and indicate that it outperforms the other
tested
algorithms
for
minimizing
areal
displacement
while
producing reasonably low measures of linear displacement. Self-
intersections can occur more commonly with APSC than other
algorithms but are avoided with the proposed topology check.
The APSC algorithm additionally preserves polygon complexity
better than other tested algorithms.
RÉSUMÉ
Ce papier présente un nouvel algorithme appelé APSC (Area
Preserving
Segment
Collapse)
pour
simplifier
les
limites
polygonales tout en préservant les surfaces à une échelle cible et
en minimisant la surface de déplacement. Nous définissons un
algorithme de réduction de segment en regroupant de façon
récursive des segments aux points de Steiner par ordre de priorité
et guidé par des fonctions de positionnement et de déplacement.
L’algorithme
est
spécifié
en
définissant
des
fonctions
qui
minimisent la surface de déplacement sous la contrainte que les
surfaces des polygones adjacents soient exactement préservées.
Les intersections de la ligne avec elle-même peuvent être évitées
en testant les intersections avec deux nouveaux segments de
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 30 September 2018
Accepted 22 May 2019
KEYWORDS
Cartographic generalization;
Steiner points; area
preservation
© 2019 International Cartographic Association
CONTACT Barry J. Kronenfeld
bjkronenfeld@eiu.edu
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
https://doi.org/10.1080/23729333.2019.1631535
ligne associés à chaque opération de réduction de segment. Le
papier présente des résultats de simplification pour un échantillon
de 10 lacs formés à partir de processus alpin, karstique, glacier et
de désert aride ainsi que des barrages artificiels. Les résultats de
l’APSC
sont
comparés
avec
trois
autres
algorithmes
de
simplification et sont évalués sur des critères de préservation de
surface, de déplacement linéaire et surfacique, de complexité et
de création d’intersection de la ligne avec elle-même. Les résultats
confirment que l’algorithme APSC préserve exactement la surface
et montre qu’il surpasse les autres algorithmes testés pour
minimiser le déplacement surfacique tout en produisant des
valeurs raisonnablement faibles pour le déplacement linéaire.
L’auto-intersection peut se produire plus souvent avec l’APSC
qu’avec d’autres algorithmes mais ces intersections sont évitées
grâce à un contrôle topologique. De plus l’algorithme APSC
préserve mieux la complexité des polygones que les autres
algorithmes testés.
Introduction
Developing simplified representations of a two-dimensional polyline is an important
problem in cartographic data analytics where datasets must be integrated a cross
spatial resolutions. This problem is generally referred to as line simplification and is
driven by preservation of global shape as well as specific analytic properties such as pos-
itional accuracy and high-frequency detail. However, the distinction between linear fea-
tures
and
polygon
boundaries
is
rarely
considered.
Polygonal
features
differ
fundamentally from linear features in that they represent areal regions covering a
portion of the Earth’s surface. As such, they lend themselves naturally to the additional
objective of preserving area across scales of representation.
Only a limited number of studies have been conducted on area-preserving polyline
simplification techniques, and these have focused on theoretical aspects (Bose et al.,
2006) and the development of algorithms for schematic simplification (Meulemans,
van Renssen, & Speckmann, 2010) and smoothing (Tutić & Lapaine, 2009). Although
areal displacement has been used both to guide (Visvalingam & Whyatt, 1992) and to
measure the quality (McMaster, 1986) of line simplification algorithms, the directional
symmetry or asymmetry of displacement is rarely considered. Shen, Ai, and He (2018)
recently compared several simplification algorithms on lake boundaries for effects on
area and positive and negative displacement area, but no simplification constraints
were applied to control these effects. We argue that displacement symmetry leads
directly to area preservation, bringing both intrinsic value as an objective function in
and of itself as well as utility in constraining solutions to minimize overall deviation
from the original polygonal boundary.
The fundamental value of area preservation derives from perceptual and analytic
requirements in various domains for accurate database and map representations of
area. On thematic maps, it is important to be able to perceive the relative density of a vari-
able, and calculation of attributes such as population density depends on accurate reten-
tion of area in simplified polygon datasets. Where line simplification is used on a
cartogram, area preservation is required to retain the accuracy of the cartogram. The
2
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
analytical importance of area extends to nearly all forms of geospatial analysis, for example
to domains such as hydrologic modeling where the surface area of lakes and streams
determines evaporation rates and geochemical exchanges between the air and water
below it. Where such modeling extends across large study areas that warrant data
reduction and boundary simplification, polygonal areas must be preserved to support
accurate computations.
Beyond the intrinsic value of preserving area for specific perceptual and analytic pur-
poses, there are logical arguments as to why area preservation might generally lead to
better preservation of global shape in reduced-scale representations of any polyline. For
instance, If the areal displacement is larger on one side of the line than on the other, a
better simplified representation could be obtained by shifting the line towards the direc-
tion of greater displacement. Since this logic applies to any line, ‘area’ preservation might
be a useful criterion even for lines that do not bound areal regions, such as single-line
rivers and roads.
To explore these ideas further, a novel area-preserving polyline simplification algorithm
is developed. The algorithm works by iteratively collapsing segments to points and is
referred to as Area-Preserving Segment Collapse (APSC). The concept of segment collapse
has been utilized in previous algorithms with explicitly visual aims of smoothing (Tutić &
Lapaine, 2009) and collapsing visually non-discernible vertices (Raposo, 2013). In contrast,
APSC is driven by analytical error-minimization objectives. Specifically, selection and col-
lapse are controlled by the simultaneous goals of minimizing areal displacement and bal-
ancing area preservation across both sides of a simplified boundary. Procedurally, APSC is
similar to the Visvalingam and Whyatt (1992) Effective Area (VEA) algorithm, but instead of
removing a single vertex at each step, two vertices are removed and one new vertex is
added.
To avoid confusion, we distinguish between two related but distinct concepts that are
both used to guide the APSC algorithm. Area preservation is a term that refers to the
precise equivalence of area computation prior to and following simplification processing.
Areal displacement, in contrast, refers to local boundary shifts during processing. All line
simplification algorithms result in some degree of areal displacement between the original
and simplified polyline. Nevertheless, it is possible to avoid a global reduction or enlarge-
ment in the size of a polygon, and thus preserve area exactly, by balancing displacement
on either side of a polygon boundary. The resulting area at target scales precisely matches
area at the source scale, even though some areal displacement occurs locally.
The segment collapse algorithm also differs from many commonly used line simplifica-
tion algorithms in that it introduces new vertices (Steiner points). Indeed, it is unlikely that
any line simplification algorithm can preserve area exactly without using Steiner points
(Bose et al., 2006). The introduction of Steiner points does not appear to obstruct preser-
vation of critical points, which tend to be situated where linear features change direction
and are acknowledged to be important for shape recognition (Attneave, 1954). Thus,
Steiner points can preserve a geometric property (area) needed for analytical purposes,
without corrupting the visual property (angular change) needed for cartographic display.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section reviews line simplification algorithms,
highlighting those that preserve area and/or introduce Steiner points. Section three
describes and illustrates the proposed segment collapse algorithm and strategy to mini-
mize areal displacement while meeting the area-preserving objective, as well as a strategy
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
3
to prevent self-intersection. Section four presents the experimental design, detailing the
comparison of APSC with VEA, Ramer-Douglas-Peucker (RDP) and Raposo Spatial Means
(RSM) algorithms. The algorithms are tested on 10 lakes from across the conterminous
United States with varying spatial structure and geomorphic origin. The results of these
experiments are presented in section five. The last section discusses advantages and dis-
advantages of the proposed algorithm and potential directions for future research.
Background
Line simplification
Numerous line simplification algorithms have been proposed and implemented. Pub-
lished reviews categorize algorithms based on the types of errors that are introduced
(McMaster, 1986), various conceptual models that guide processing (McMaster & Shea,
1992), a comparison of assumptions underlying generalization processing (Buttenfield,
1985), chronologies of algorithm development (Li, 2006, 2007) and inventories of gener-
alization operators (Stanislawski, Buttenfield, Bereuter, Savino, & Brewer, 2014). Interested
readers are encouraged to explore these resources for comprehensive discussions about
specific approaches and algorithms.
Several algorithms are commonly encountered in GIS software platforms. The RDP
algorithm simplifies a feature by retaining a subset of vertices that lie further than the tol-
erance distance from a hierarchy of baselines composed from the feature’s vertices
(Douglas & Peucker, 1973; Ramer, 1972). The simplification proceeds hierarchically, effec-
tively prioritizing coordinate positions for progressively more aggressive simplifications.
This algorithm is useful for simplifying human-made linear features whose angularity is
deemed important, such as building polygons, roads or administrative boundaries. It
carries the added advantage of preserving a subset of original coordinates at every
level of simplification. The Bend-Simplify algorithm (Wang & Müller, 1998) moves along
a line and eliminates points that demarcate small curves and bends while preserving
larger trending shapes. The algorithm attempts to simulate manual line simplification
by applying rule-based operations on bend features that would be identified and pro-
cessed (i.e. removed or merged) by a human cartographer. The Bend-Simplify algorithm
is typically used for naturally occurring features, such as stream channels and lakes
(Gary, Wilson, Archuleta, Thompson, & Vrabel, 2010). The VEA method attempts to mini-
mize areal displacement by forming triangles from triplets of sequential points and repla-
cing the smallest triangles with a straight-line segment by eliminating the middle point
(Visvalingam & Whyatt, 1992). While areal displacement is effectively reduced, the algor-
ithm does not preserve area precisely.
Steiner points
The above algorithms all produce simplified polylines that consist of a subset of the orig-
inal polyline vertices, with no ‘Steiner’ points. The concept of Steiner points comes from
the discipline of computational geometry and refers to a point or set of points that are
introduced when solving a geometric optimization problem to improve upon solutions
based only on the original point set (de Berg, van Kreveld, Overmars, & Schwarzkopf,
4
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
2000). Steiner points have been used, for example, to develop triangulations with better
properties such as larger minimum angle and shorter total line length (Eppstein, 1994).
In the context of line simplification, the flexibility afforded by Steiner points may enable
solutions with less displacement than popular algorithms that do not employ Steiner
points. For example, Cromley (1992) presents an algorithm generating a principal axis
or regression line through subsets of vertices, using Steiner points to reduce a line to a
given tolerance using fewer vertices than required by the RDP algorithm.
Several algorithms utilizing Steiner points operate by enclosing a small number of
original coordinates within a regular polygon and then reducing them to a single repre-
sentative (Steiner) point, such as the centroid of the regular polygon or the spatial
mean of the vertices located within that polygon. Li and Openshaw (1992) overlay a
regular square grid onto a polyline and collapse vertices within each grid cell to a
single point. Raposo (2013) improves on the methods of Li and Openshaw by using a hex-
agonal tesselation instead of a square grid. In the RSM algorithm, coordinates falling within
each hexagon are replaced with the spatial mean of those coordinates, which is likely a
Steiner point when more than one point falls within a hexagon. RSM has the added advan-
tage of obtaining significantly lower horizontal displacement errors than occur with Li and
Openshaw’s (1992) method.
It is worthwhile to examine the general case for Steiner points, and how the inclusion of
points that are not in the original coordinate set can lead to a better representation. Con-
sider the case of a polygon with a large number of vertices that approximates a circle, and
the problem of representing this feature with a simpler polygon containing only six ver-
tices (Figure 1). An optimal simplification will be a regular hexagon. If the n vertices are
constrained to the original polygon (Figure 1(a)), it will be an inscribed hexagon, and
17.3% of the original polygon will fall outside the simplified shape. On the other hand,
if Steiner points are allowed, one can construct a hexagon with an equal area to the orig-
inal polygon. In this case, 3.7% of the original polygon will fall outside the hexagon, and an
equal area of the hexagon will fall outside the original polygon. Thus the total areal displa-
cement will be 7.4%, an improvement of 57% from the optimal solution without Steiner
points.
Note that the introduction of Steiner points not only reduces the overall displacement
area but also balances it on either side of the original polygon boundary, thus preserving
the area of the polygon.
Figure 1. Optimal simplification of a polygon simplifying a circle to six vertices without (a) and with (b)
Steiner points.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
5
Handling topological errors
Most line simplification algorithms can produce topological errors such as self-intersec-
tions, and various strategies have been proposed to avoid these errors. These can be
divided into strategies to prevent topological errors from occurring during the line simplifi-
cation process (e.g. Kulik, Duckham, & Egenhofer, 2005; Saalfeld, 1999) and strategies to
detect and fix topological errors after simplification (e.g. Lee & Hardy, 2005; Raposo,
2013). Of most relevance to our work is the observation by Kulik et al. (2005) that the tri-
angle-criterion, derived from mathematical topology, enables a simple topology check for
any algorithm that works by sequential vertex elimination. The triangle-criterion states
that when a vertex is eliminated from a polyline, topological errors will be introduced
only if there exists a point lying in the triangle formed by that vertex and its neighbors.
Thus, for any sequential elimination algorithm, a simple point-in-triangle test can be
used to identify and avoid topological errors associated with eliminating each vertex.
Area preservation
Only a few studies have investigated the preservation of area in polyline simplification. The
lack of algorithms that preserve area is an inevitable consequence of the fact that most line
simplification algorithms retain subsets of the original vertices, since the general problem
of determining if a line can be simplified to preserve adjoining areas is intractable for large
polylines (i.e. NP-hard) when only existing vertices are used (Bose et al., 2006). Indeed, on a
closed convex polygon such as shown in Figure 1, preserving adjoining areas without
using Steiner points is demonstrably impossible. Thus, the few algorithms that have
been developed to preserve area either are inexact or introduce Steiner points.
Bose et al. (2006) develop an algorithm to preserve area to within a specified toler-
ance without using Steiner points. Their algorithm can only be applied, however, to
so-called monotone chains, which are polylines or sections of polylines that can be
rotated such that they cross any given x-coordinate only once. Meulemans et al.
(2010) present an exact area-preserving schematization of polygon tessellations that
uses Steiner points. Their schematization is rectilinear and provides effective simplifica-
tion of artificial features such as buildings, but the algorithm is not suitable for lakes and
other natural features.
Tutić and Lapaine (2009) present an area-preserving line smoothing algorithm that is
most applicable to the cartographic generalization of natural features, and that shares
some characteristics of the APSC algorithm. Collapsing individual segments to Steiner
points, they demonstrate that area is preserved if these Steiner points are located on a
specific line whose equation can be computed from the coordinates of the vertices of
the collapsed segment and immediately adjacent segments. While our proposed algor-
ithm utilizes this result, it differs from the algorithm of Tutić and Lapaine (2009) in three
ways. First, their algorithm traverses the input polyline sequentially, whereas the one pro-
posed here searches for the optimal segment to collapse at each step. Secondly, Tutić and
Lapaine collapse only zig-zag sections (S-curves) in which two consecutive polyline seg-
ments turn in different directions, and they do not handle curves where two consecutive
segments curve in the same direction (C-curves). This appears to substantially restrict the
number of vertices that can be eliminated with their algorithm. APSC does simplify both S-
6
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
curves and C-curves. Finally, in choosing the placement of new Steiner points, Tutić and
Lapaine seek to minimize sharp angles, resulting in an algorithm that effectively
smooths the original polyline. In contrast, the proposed APSC algorithm minimizes areal
displacement, and thereby produces a simplified polyline that is similar in character to
the original polyline.
Methods
General segment collapse algorithm
A general segment collapse algorithm can be defined by iteratively collapsing segments to
points, selecting at each iteration the collapse operation that will result in the least displa-
cement. A collapse operation begins with a four-vertex sequence ABCD and involves
removing the interior segment BC and replacing it with a single vertex E (Figure 2).
Two functions are required to fully specify the algorithm. First, a placement function
determines, for a given sequence of vertices ABCD, the location to place the new
vertex E. Second, a displacement function measures the associated degree of displace-
ment between ABCD and AED. The placement function is used to create a list of potential
collapse operations for the current set of line segments, and to update this list after each
operation is performed. The displacement function is used to prioritize the order in which
segments are collapsed. The process continues until a stopping condition is met.
Pseudo-code for simplifying a line L to a target areal displacement tolerance t is as
follows:
function segment_collapse(L, t)
worklist ← empty list
for all consecutive sequences ABCD in L:
E ← placement(ABCD)
d ← displacement(ABCD � AED)
add [ABCD, E, d] to worklist
while worklist is not empty:
[ABCD, E, d] ← item with min d in worklist
if d < t:
collapse BC to E
with worklist:
Figure 2. Segment collapse. Segment BC on the original (dashed) feature is replaced by vertex E on the
simplified (solid) feature.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
7
remove all 4-vertex sequences involving B or C
add all 4-vertex sequences involving E
else exit
The algorithm can also be modified to stop once a target number of vertices is reached,
rather than a target areal displacement tolerance. Alternatively, cumulative areal displace-
ment can be tracked and used to parameterize the algorithm. The algorithm is general in
the sense that different placement and displacement functions can be defined to meet
different objectives.
As a specific instance of the general algorithm, we define an area-preserving segment
collapse (APSC) algorithm by specifying the displacement function as areal displacement,
i.e. the total area enclosed by ABCD and AED (McMaster, 1986), and by defining a place-
ment function that both (a) preserves area on each side of the original line, and (b) mini-
mizes areal displacement under the area-preserving constraint.
Area preservation
The conditions for preserving area while collapsing a segment to a Steiner point are given
in Tutić and Lapaine (2009). Consider the four-vertex sequence ABCD in Figure 3(a). We
seek a new point E such that the areas on each side of AED are equal to the areas on
each side of ABCD. It is sufficient to measure the areas between these polyline sections,
separating them into areas to the left (L) and right (R) of the original polygon as shown
in Figure 3. The area preservation condition dictates that these two areas must be equal.
Let
denote the area of the triangle with vertices i, j and k using the standard
clockwise-sequence shoelace formula or Surveyor’s formula (Braden, 1986), i.e. measured
such that the area is negative if the vertices are sequenced counterclockwise. The area
preservation condition can be expressed as follows:
(1a)
Figure 3. Area preservation condition. (a) a four-vertex sequence on the original polygon, (b) place-
ment of new vertex E to maximize angle ∡AED while preserving area, (c) placement of new vertex
E to minimize areal displacement while preserving area.
8
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
This simplifies to the following equation:
axE + byE + c = 0,
(1b)
where:
a = yD − yA,
b = xA − xD,
c = −yBxA + (yA − yC)xB + (yB − yD)xC + yCxD.
Equation (1) defines a line that is parallel to AD, which we denote as E
↔
(Figure 3(b,c)). This
line represents the set of possible locations of the vertex E that would meet the area pres-
ervation condition. Intuitively, the distance from AD to E
↔
represents the height of triangle
DADE whose base is AD. Figure 3(b,c) illustrates two possible solutions that preserve area,
since E is located on E
↔
in both figures.
Minimizing areal displacement
Since the area is preserved, placement of E anywhere on E
↔
will result in equal areal dis-
placement to the left and right of the original polyline. However, the magnitude of this
displacement will vary depending on where on E
↔
the new vertex is placed. It is natural
to seek the location of E that will minimize total areal displacement, thus meeting the
second objective mentioned above. This objective was mentioned but not solved by
Tutić and Lapaine (2009), who instead chose to maximize the angle ∡AED. Figure 3 illus-
trates the difference between the angle-maximizing solution (Figure 3(b)) and the solution
that minimizes areal displacement (Figure 3(c)).
To develop the areal-displacement-minimizing solution, we consider regular topologi-
cal configurations of the vertices B and C and the lines AD and E
↔
. Specifically, we show that
the minimum areal displacement is obtained by placing E at the intersection of E
↔
with
either AB or CD depending on the topological configuration of B, C, E
↔
and AD. Excluding
singularities, three configurations are possible (Figure 4):
1. vertices B and C are on opposite sides of both AD and E
↔
(Figure 4(a)),
2. vertices B and C are on the same side of AD but different sides of E
↔
(Figure 4(b)), or
3. vertices B and C are located between AD and E
↔
(Figure 4(c)).
Vertices B and C cannot both lie on the same side of both AD and E
↔
because if they did,
then the area preservation condition would not be met.
The location of E that minimizes areal displacement for each configuration is shown in
Figure 4. Consider the first configuration, with vertices B and C on opposite sides of both
AD and E
↔
(Figure 4(a)). If B is on the same side of AD as E
↔
(as shown) then the optimal
location for E is the intersection of AB and E
↔
, otherwise, it is the intersection of CD and
E
↔
. To confirm that this is optimal, consider any alternative location E′ on E
↔
and the corre-
sponding displacement areas L’ and R’ to the left and right of the original (dashed) line
(Figure 5). For any E′ below E, L’ includes L as a proper part and is, therefore, larger
than L (Figure 5(b)). If E′ is above E two cases must be considered. For E′ such that the inter-
section of AE′ and BC is closer to B than the intersection of ED and BC (Figure 5(c)), R’ will
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
9
include R as a proper part. On the other hand, for E′ such that the intersection of AE′ and BC
is closer to C than the intersection of ED and BC (Figure 5(d)), L’ will include L as a proper
part. Since L=R (by Equation (1)), in all cases the total areal displacement L’+R’ will be larger
than L+R.
The logic shown in Figure 5(b,c) applies to the configuration in Figure 4(b) for any E′
above or below E. For the configuration in Figure 4(c), the logic shown in Figure 5(c)
applies for any E′ below E. For E′ above E, R’ > R can be proven geometrically by splitting
R and R’ into two triangles along a vertical line through B, and noting that both their shared
baseline and the sum of their altitudes will increase. Building on these observations, a
common rule can be applied to the configurations in both 4b and 4c: if B is further
from AD than C then the location of E that minimizes areal displacement is the intersection
of CD and E
↔
, otherwise it is the intersection of AB and E
↔
.
Figure 5. Illustration of the optimality of the placement of E in Figure 4(a). (a) optimal placement at the
intersection of AB and E
↔
, (b) placement below the intersection of AB and E
↔
, (c) placement above the
intersection of AB and E
↔
. Dark shaded areas in (b) and (c) signify the additional region of displacement
added to L and R, respectively, by moving E from its position in (a).
Figure 4. Possible configurations of B, C, AD and E
↔
. (a) B and C are on opposite sides of both AD and E
↔
;
(b) B and C are on the same side of AD but opposite sides of E
↔
; (c) B and C both lie between AD and E
↔
.
Optimal placement of E is at intersection of E
↔
and AB if: (a) E
↔
and B are on the same side of AD; (b or c)
B is further than C from AD. Otherwise, optimal placement of E is at intersection of E
↔
and CD.
10
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
Combining the above observations, a placement function for choosing the location of
the new vertex E to replace vertices B and C in a sequence of vertices A, B, C, D can be
expressed in pseudo-code as follows:
function placement(A,B,C,D)
Compute E
↔
using eq. 1.
if side(B, AD) = side(C, AD):
if d(B, AD) . d(C, AD):
return intersection(E
↔
, AB)
Else if d(B, AD) , d(C, AD):
return intersection(E
↔
, CD)
else:
if side(B, AD) = side(E
↔
, AD):
return intersection(E
↔
, AB)
else:
return intersection(E
↔
, CD)
Here, d(x, L) denotes the perpendicular distance between point x and line L, and side
side(x, L) denotes the topological position of a point x (or a point on the line x if x is a
line), which can be either left or right of the directed line L.
We now consider the optimality of the above placement function in three singular
configurations, shown in Figure 6. In Figure 6(a), E
↔
is coincident with AD. In this case,
the placement of E anywhere along E
↔
is optimal and will result in three collinear vertices.
The placement function described above will result in the placement of E at either A or D
(shown). Figure 6(b) represents the case where three sequential vertices B, C and D are col-
linear. Clearly, optimal placement is at B. This is equivalent to removing the middle of the
three collinear vertices, in this case C. Furthermore, the displacement area associated with
this collapse operation will be zero. This means that removal of collinear vertices (including
those resulting from the configuration in Figure 6(a)) will be automatically prioritized by
the segment collapse algorithm. Lastly, Figure 6(c) shows the situation where BC is parallel
to AD (and thus E
↔
), in other words, B and C are equidistant from AD. In this configuration,
Figure 6. Examples of singular configurations, with optimal placement of E: (a) E
↔
is coincident with AD
(placement anywhere between A and D is optimal, but placement is not necessary), (b) B, C and D are
collinear (optimal placement is at B), (c) BC is parallel with AD (placement along E
↔
anywhere between
the intersections with AB and CD is optimal).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
11
placing E anywhere between the locations where E
↔
intersects AB and CD will result in
equal areal displacement. For each of the above singular configurations, the placement
function described above will produce an optimal solution, although in two cases it is
just one of many possible such solutions. We note, however, that such singular cases
will occur rarely for natural features.
Preventing self-intersection
We now describe a simple test to avoid self-intersections. First, note that each collapse
event in the APSC algorithm results in displacement across at most two triangular
regions. Since these triangles may contain more than one new edge, however, the tri-
angle-criterion does not strictly apply. That is, we cannot simply check for the existence
of a vertex within these displacement triangles, because a topological error may be
caused by a line segment that crosses a triangle but whose endpoints both lie outside
of it. However, since the displacement area at each step is well defined it is still possible
to check for any topological error caused by this displacement. To prevent self-intersec-
tions, it is sufficient to check whether any existing line segment (excluding AB, BC and
CD) crosses either AE or ED prior to performing each collapse event and then exclude
that collapse operation. By refraining from collapsing any segment in which either of
these two triangles intersects an existing segment, it can be guaranteed that no self-inter-
sections will be introduced in the simplification process.
Comparison of simplification algorithms
Data
We conducted an experiment to compare the effectiveness of APSC with three well-known
line simplification algorithms. As experimental data, a set of ten (10) lakes was selected
from different conditions within the conterminous United States. Sample features are
from the high-resolution (HR) National Hydrography Dataset (NHD). Within the contermi-
nous United States, HR NHD is a multi-scale dataset composed of hydrographic data from
the best available data contributed from source scales of 1:24,000 (24 K) or larger (Stani-
slawski, Falgout, & Buttenfield, 2015; Stanislawski et al., 2016; U. S. Geological Survey,
2017). Ten sample lakes formed by a variety of geomorphic processes were selected for
analysis, with one, two, two, four, and one of the lakes derived from alpine, dam, desert,
glacial and karst geomorphic conditions, respectively (Figure 7). The lakes range in area
from about 31 to over 63,000 square kilometers, with boundaries containing between
1800 and 410,000 vertices (mean: 54,946, median: 9253). Features are represented with
coordinates projected in the North American Albers Equal Area Conic projection.
Experimental design
Three simplification algorithms – VEA, RDP, and RSM – are compared to the APSC algor-
ithm both with and without a topology check to prevent self-intersections. For comparison
purposes, we follow previous researchers (Shi & Cheung, 2006; Tutić & Lapaine, 2009; Vis-
valingam & Whyatt, 1993; Zhou & Jones, 2005) to simplify each feature to nearly identical
numbers of vertices using each algorithm. Since each of the 10 HR NHD lake polylines has
a different number of vertices, the target number of vertices to retain for each feature is
12
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
chosen by using the Radical Law (Töpfer & Pillewizer, 1966) to estimate vertices sufficient
for target scales of 1:100,000 (100K); 1:500,000 (500 K); 1:1,000,000 (1 M); and 1:5,000,000
(5 M). This results in target proportions of original vertices of 0.49, 0.22, 0.15, and 0.07
respectively. We do not attempt to directly target a given map scale through parameter-
ization because each algorithm uses a different metric for parameterization, so the results
would not be comparable. With VEA, RDP and APSC, the target number of vertices is
obtained exactly by sequentially removing or adding points. For RSM, we iteratively
adjust the controlling parameter (hexagon size) until the target number of vertices is
obtained as nearly as possible. In some cases, this results in differences of +/−2 vertices
from the target.
Assessment
Several metrics compare the geometric characteristics resulting from each algorithm.
Metrics determined for each simplified lake polygon include area, areal displacement,
complexity, and modified Hausdorff distance (MHD). The area of original and simplified
polygons is computed using the shoelace (Surveyor’s) formula (Braden, 1986). For this
paper, polygon complexity is defined as the perimeter squared divided by the area,
which is the inverse of a commonly used compactness metric (MacEachren, 1985). Areal
displacement is computed as the summed area of polygons created when an original
Figure 7. Geographic category and distribution of 10 sample lakes in the conterminous United States.
Features are selected from the waterbody feature class of the high-resolution National Hydrography
Dataset. Five-kilometer resolution data show the approximate range of elevation conditions within
the study.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
13
linear feature and a simplified version of the same feature are overlaid. For the case of
polygons, the displacement area is determined through a union of the original polygon
with its simplified version after all island polygons are removed from the simplified
version, which may occur when a boundary intersects itself. The issue of self-intersection
is further addressed later in the discussion section.
The Hausdorff distance between two geometric shapes is the largest minimum distance
between any point on one shape to any point on the other (Hangouët, 1995; Nutanong,
Jacox, & Samet, 2011; Rucklidge, 1996). For computational efficiency, modified Hausdorff dis-
tance (MHD) is determined in this paper as the larger of two distances: either the furthest
minimum distance between the vertices of the simplified line and its original version, or
the furthest minimum distance between the vertices of the original line and its simplified
version. Given some vertex reduction, these two distances will not be equal in every case
because the minimum distances are not always vertex-to-vertex.
Area, area displacement, complexity, and MHD are computed for original and sim-
plified features for each of the four levels of simplification using each algorithm.
Values for 10 lake features are averaged for each level of simplification. Percent
change from original values is computed for average complexity and average area. In
addition, the maximum MHD is identified among the ten lake features for each simplifi-
cation level and algorithm.
To assess topological correctness of simplified features, self-intersections are identified
on each simplified feature, and the number of intersections is tabulated for each feature.
No self-intersections exist in the original lake boundaries.
Results
Simplification assessment metrics are compared with respect to the percent of original
vertices retained for 10 sample features at each level of detail. An average number of ver-
tices decreases with increasing simplification to achieve smaller scale representations,
with average vertices of about 55,000 (100%) for original features reducing to about
3800 (7%) at 5 M.
Area preservation
Mean and maximum change in the area of all lakes caused by simplification at the four levels
of detail are summarized in Figure 8. When reviewing figures, higher simplification results
are on the left moving to less simplification on the right. Results confirm that APSC with top-
ology check results in no net change in area, meaning that displacement areas on the inside
and outside of the original features were exactly equivalent. Without the topology check our
calculations showed a very slight change in area caused by the APSC, but this may be due to
ambiguities of performing calculations on self-intersecting polygons.
Percent absolute change in area (Figure 8(a)) increases on average with increasing
levels of simplification for all other algorithms. To illustrate worst-case scenarios, the
maximum changes in area for each algorithm were also evaluated. The greatest percent
change in area is generated with the RSM algorithm, which causes up to 0.3 percent
area change at the 100 K level (49% vertices retained) and 5.6 percent change at the
5 M level (7% vertices retained). Maximum overall change in area at the 5 M level
14
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
ranged from 1.0 km2 for the VEA algorithm to as high as 3.6 km2 with the RSM algorithm.
The VEA algorithm generated less area change than RDP at all levels of detail, and RSM
generated the most areal change at all but one level of detail.
Areal displacement
Average total displacement area of the simplified features on the inside and the outside of
the original features increases with increasing levels of simplification as shown in Figure 9.
Average values indicate the APSC algorithm generates the least displacement area at all
levels of detail, with a maximum average displacement area of 4.4 km2 at the 5 M level
of detail. Including a topology check increased areal displacement slightly (2.5% on
average) above the value obtained without the topology check. Increasingly larger
average displacement areas are generated by the VEA, RDP, and RSM algorithms, which
respectively peak at 5.8, 7.4, and 13.2 km2 at the 5 M level of detail.
Figure 9. Mean displacement area in square kilometers (sq. km.) from original features for ten sim-
plified lake polygons at four levels of detail. Asterisk denotes algorithm implemented with topology
check.
Figure 8. Absolute changes in area from original features for 10 lake polygons simplified to 4 levels of
detail. (a) mean percent change in area, (b) mean absolute change in area, and (c) maximum absolute
change in area. Values for APSC algorithm with and without topology check are nearly identical and
cannot be visually distinguished.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
15
Modified Hausdorff Distance (MHD)
Average and maximum linear displacement measured using MHD values are summarized
in Figure 10(a,b), respectively. The RDP algorithm generates the least positional displace-
ment of all algorithms, as indicated by both average and maximum values, with the APSC
algorithm generating the next larger values, at all levels of simplification. Shi and Cheung
(2006) tested several line simplification algorithms on island boundaries and also found
the RDP produced the least positional displacement than other tested algorithms.
Inclusion of a topology check reduced MHD noticeably at 500 K and 1 M scales, but this
effect varied widely and the topology check also increased MHD for some features. VEA
and RSM generate more positional displacement than RDP and APSC at all simplification
levels. For the features tested, maximum displacement values from the APSC (both with
and without topology check) and RDP are smaller than the National Map Accuracy Stan-
dards (NMAS) of 1/50th of an inch (U. S. Bureau of Budget, 1947) at 100 K, 500 K, 1 M, and
5 M, which converts to about 51, 254, 508, and 2540 meters, respectively. VEA creates a
maximum MHD value greater than the NMAS standard at 100 K, and RSM creates a
value that exceeds standards at 100 K, 500 K and 1 M. Average MHD values, however,
were below NMAS limits for all algorithms at all tested scales.
Complexity of boundary lines
Complexity values of the original lakes (as described above) range from 37 to 2475, with an
average of 504. The sample lakes are about 3–200 times more complex than a minimum
complexity unit circle (complexity = 12.57). Average percent change in feature complexity
of the simplified lakes compared to original features is shown in Figure 11. As expected,
feature complexity decreases, on average, with increasing simplification in all cases,
except for the APSC algorithm, which shows a slight increase in average complexity at
Figure 10. Modified Hausdorff distance from original features for 10 simplified lake polygons at four
levels of detail. (a) mean modified Hausdorff distance, (b) maximum modified Hausdorff distance.
Asterisk denotes algorithm implemented with topology check.
16
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
the 100 K, 500 K, and 1 M simplification levels. This pattern was moderated slightly with
the inclusion of a topology check. The protection of feature complexity at large scales
forms an unexpected result, and indicates that the algorithm tends to extend curves
outward more often than it eliminates curves at least at low levels of simplification.
On average RDP and VEA reduce complexity about the same amount as APSC
increases it at the 100 K level, with the RSM algorithm having the largest average com-
plexity reduction of about 6 percent. At higher simplification levels, average feature
complexity decreases, with APSC, causing the least change, and increasingly larger
changes result for RDP, VEA, and RSM, with RSM reducing complexity by nearly 35
percent, on average, at 5 M level of detail. Shi and Cheung (2006) noted the RDP algor-
ithm created the least amount of angular shape distortion among the algorithms tested
on island boundaries.
Topological correctness
Prior to incorporating a topology check, the APSC algorithm generated a greater number
of self-intersections during simplification processing than did other tested algorithms
(Table 1). Self-intersecting lines are, however, generated by all four tested simplification
methods and levels of detail, with larger numbers generated in more sinuous parts of
Table 1. Self intersections (features with at least one self-intersection) created for 10 simplified lake
polygons at four levels of detail using four simplification algorithms.
Simplification level
Algorithm
0.49
0.22
0.15
0.07
APSC
4(2)
67(8)
151(9)
264(9)
APSC*
0(0)
0(0)
0(0)
0(0)
VEA
4(2)
6(3)
21(6)
22(6)
RDP
2(1)
14(6)
33(8)
96(6)
RSM
7(3)
28(5)
30(5)
62(7)
Notes: Four levels of detail, 1:100,000, 1:500,000, 1:1,000,000, and 1:5,000,000 reduce the number of vertices of each lake
feature to about 49, 22, 15, and 7 percent of the vertices of the original feature, respectively. Number of intersections/
number of lake boundaries with intersections. Highest values are bold.
Figure 11. Mean percent change in feature complexity from original features for ten simplified lake
polygons at four levels of detail. Asterisk denotes algorithm implemented with topology check.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
17
the boundary, and as more vertices are removed. The APSC generates the largest number
of intersections at the three smallest levels of detail, creating more than twice as many
intersections than the other algorithms respectively. The RSM method generates the
most self-intersections at the highest level of detail, 100K. Self-intersections are more
common for the APSC algorithm because the introduction of Steiner points can result
in exaggeration of existing curves (discussed further below). As noted previously, strat-
egies exist to avoid self-intersection for all line simplification algorithms, but for the
present research, a topology check was implemented only for the APSC algorithm. As
shown in Table 1, our analysis confirms that the topology check prevented the APSC
from introducing any self-intersections.
Illustration of the method
To illustrate the differences between algorithms, a section of Lake Winnipesaukee, a lake of
glacial origin in northern New England, is shown in Figure 12 with reductions to the 1M
level of detail (15% of vertices retained). All algorithms present a reasonably accurate fac-
simile of the original feature, but in the displayed region the RDP algorithm retains more
points and therefore appears to capture the most detail. However, the APSC algorithm
accurately captures important details that are missed by the VEA and RSM algorithms,
such as the long and narrow inlet at center right. The RDP algorithm also captures the
inlet. Despite the greater detail captured by other algorithms in various parts of the
lake, APSC results in the smallest pockets of local areal displacement among the four algor-
ithms (Figure 12, bottom row).
The effects of the topology check are illustrated in Figure 13 for a portion of Lake Mead
simplified to the 5 M level of detail (7% of vertices retained). In regions of high-frequency
Figure 12. A portion of Lake Winnipesaukee, northern New England, with features simplified to
1:1,000,000 scale (top) and associated areal displacement (bottom) for four line simplification algor-
ithms. Areas outside the simplified lines that are eliminated from the lake are shown in green, and
areas inside the simplified lines that are added to the lake are shown in purple.
18
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
detail where features must be eliminated, APSC tends to find a middle path through
inward and outward facing protuberances (Figure 13(a)). On the other hand, in regions
of low-frequency detail where large features must be simplified, APSC tends to exaggerate
protuberances (Figure 13(b)), which can lead to self-intersection (Figure 13(c)). The top-
ology check avoids the creation of self-intersections, and this avoidance can have a cas-
cading influence on the simplification process elsewhere, especially in the immediate
neighborhood of a potential self-intersection.
In a production environment, a typical goal of generalization is to reduce content at
smaller scales for data storage and processing requirements while preserving details for
legibility or analytic tasks (Gary et al., 2010). In our comparative analyses, the first goal
was guided by the Radical Law (Gökgöz, Sen, Memduhoglu, & Hacar, 2015; Stanislawski,
2009; Töpfer & Pillewizer, 1966) to establish an appropriate target number of vertices as
a clear and simple standard by which to conduct a controlled comparison of different
line simplification algorithms. This approach has been followed by other researchers
(Tutić & Lapaine, 2009; Visvalingam & Whyatt, 1992; Zhou & Jones, 2005), but in production
environments, it is more common to use a tolerance defined by the largest insignificant
detail at target scale. For this purpose, we recommend setting an areal displacement tol-
erance area equal to the area of a triangle with sides of ¼ mm at the target scale.
Figure 14 illustrates this strategy applied to six lake features in the HR NHD from Min-
nesota, USA (U. S. Geological Survey, 2017), including lakes characterized by high, medium
and low-frequency detail. Simplification to target scales of 1:100 K (4× reduction) and
1:250 K (10× reduction) was performed using the APSC algorithm with areal displacement
tolerance equal to 541 and 3383 m2, respectively. This reduced the number of vertices to
Figure 13. A portion of Lake Mead with features simplified to 1:5,000,000 scale using the APSC algor-
ithm with and without performing a topology check to prevent self-intersections. Highlighted regions
indicate (a) high-frequency detail, (b) low-frequency detail, (c) a self-intersection that is prevented by
the topology check. See text for explanation.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
19
27% and 13% of the original count at 1:100 K and 1:250 K, respectively, somewhat fewer
than predicted by the Radical Law. When displayed at the target scales, the sub-portions of
features remain recognizable and the overlay of a segment of one lake section at all three
scales shows close spatial coincidence. Several small angularities are introduced that
appear unnaturally sharp in the enlarged overlay, but effectively convey the existence
of intrusions and extrusions at target scales. Thus, the method reduces content yet
Figure 14. APSC algorithm applied to National Hydrology Dataset (NHD) lake boundaries compiled at
1:24 K shown at two target scales (1:100 K and 1:250 K). Each scaled version is labeled with the number
of vertices retained. The panel in lower right corner overlays a section of Mitten Lake (Minnesota)
boundary at all three scales to demonstrate the amount of spatial coincidence.
20
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
maintains shape and geometric characteristics such as frequency of detail, preserving
global and local polygon shape even across large scale reductions.
Discussion
This paper presents a simplification algorithm that is novel relative to other simplification
methods in wide use today in that it simultaneously aims to preserve area and minimize
areal displacement. These two constraints guide the selection and collapse of polyline seg-
ments to Steiner points. Whereas most other algorithms that use Steiner points (Cromley,
1992; Li & Openshaw, 1992; Meulemans et al., 2010; Raposo, 2013) may collapse large clus-
ters of vertices locally to a single point at once, the APSC algorithm is incremental, seeking
the optimal pair of vertices to collapse at each step. Procedurally, APSC combines some
characteristics of VEA (Visvalingam & Whyatt, 1992) and the area-preserving algorithm
of Tutić and Lapaine (2009), with the additional development of a procedure for minimiz-
ing areal displacement during segment collapse. The algorithm in its current version is
computationally feasible for application to large datasets even with the inclusion of topo-
logical protection.
Preliminary results indicate the APSC algorithm performs well at tasks for which it was
designed and generally outperforms the other algorithms. Specifically, the method pre-
cisely preserves area and outperforms the other tested algorithms at minimizing areal dis-
placement. Local pockets of areal displacement are visibly smaller for APSC than for other
algorithms, illustrating the advantage of using Steiner points to balance displacement on
either side of the polyline. Not surprisingly, the APSC does not perform better than other
algorithms at tasks that it was not designed to perform. In tests reported here, the RDP
algorithm generates the smallest overall positional displacement at all levels of detail,
and substantially outperforms APSC and other tested algorithms in this regard.
The distinctive properties of the APSC algorithm lead to some interesting results. The
introduction of Steiner points allows APSC to maintain shape complexity, as bend features
appear more likely to be exaggerated than eliminated at early stages of simplification. By
the same token, however, in complex or sinuous sections of the features, these exagger-
ations result in a large number of self-intersections relative to other methods, which dis-
torts topological relations and can impact area computations. This can be remedied with
the inclusion of a simple line intersection test to prevent collapse operations that would
result in a self-intersection. The self-intersection test had little impact on most quantitative
metrics, with the largest difference being a reduction in average and maximum modified
Hausdorff distance at some levels of simplification (Figure 10(a,b)). We did not incorporate
self-intersection tests for the other algorithms that we compared. However, given that
these algorithms resulted in fewer self-intersections to begin with (Table 1), we suspect
that such tests would have even smaller impact on the quantitative metrics that were
evaluated.
The APSC method appears to maintain horizontal positional displacement within NMAS
standards and, on average, maintains smaller horizontal positional changes than the other
methods, except for the RDP algorithm as mentioned above. Problems with positional dis-
placement and intersections tend to occur in areas of high-frequency detail, such as along
coastlines with embedded docks or piers. This implies the space between the high fre-
quency details where intersections occur are smaller than NMAS standards and possibly
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
21
too small to be appropriate for retention at smaller target scales, based upon feature
capture specifications or legibility. Some modification of the algorithm may also be war-
ranted to limit the generation of thin or jagged protrusions. While the topological correc-
tion eliminates self-crossings, it is a binary operator and as such does not prevent lines
from nearly touching each other. Perhaps some additional or alternative generalization
operation is needed for proximal repeated or opposing protrusions, for example, the
circled segment of the Island Lake polygon in Figure 14. Alternatively, positional displace-
ment constraints could be tightened for overly detailed sections, effectively implementing
an adaptive simplification strategy. Several scholars have considered adaptive strategies
for line simplification (e.g. Mustiere, 2005; Nakos, Gaffuri, & Mustiere, 2008; Samsonov &
Yakimova, 2017; Shahriari & Tao, 2002), and these could be tailored and modified to
inform future research on areal displacement.
The comparative testing applied in this analysis constrains features to a specific number
of vertices, governed by the Radical Law. This allows for direct comparison among different
algorithms but is not the typical parameterization for cartographic simplification algorithms.
A more common approach is to designate an acceptable error tolerance (i.e. distance for
RDP, hexagon radius for RSM) and permit a more flexible parameterization of the number
of vertices to retain. Similar to VEA, the APSC algorithm can be parameterized by designating
an acceptable areal displacement at each step. Unlike RDP and RSM however, the error tol-
erance parameter for both VEA and APSC applies to individual steps only and does not guar-
antee an upper limit on cumulative error. Consequently, for production scenarios where
such a guarantee is required, trial-and-error may be required when using VEA and APSC
to determine the appropriate parameter value for each feature.
The APSC algorithm focuses on area preservation and as such is designed specifically
for polygon boundary simplification. However, its overall performance makes it a plausible
candidate for effectively simplifying any vector line feature. The observed protection of
feature complexity, which is distinct from other algorithms, suggests that the algorithm
may have unique properties that would make it suitable for specialized applications
and this warrants further research. Lastly, the results for APSC reported here all pertain
to the specific placement and displacement functions described, but different results
might be obtained by substituting different placement and displacement functions into
the general segment collapse algorithm.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate reviewer comments that strengthen the current version of this manuscript.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
Dr. Buttenfield’s research forms a portion of work for the Grand Challenge Initiative ‘Earth Lab’ for the
Data Harmonization Project, funded by the University of Colorado. https://www.colorado.edu/earth-
lab/science-projects.
22
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
Notes on contributors
Barry J. Kronenfeld is Associate Professor of Geography at Eastern Illinois University. His research
investigates innovative techniques for modeling, visualizing and analyzing spatial patterns in
human and physical landscapes. Recent projects include cartogram construction, spatial interaction,
and modeling of gradation in area-class maps. He is currently serving as coordinator for the Pro-
fessional Science Master’s degree program at EIU.
Lawrence V. Stanislawski is a researcher for the Center of Excellence for Geospatial Information
Science at the U.S. Geological Survey in Rolla, Missouri. His research interests include multiscale rep-
resentation and automated generalization of geospatial data, geomorphometry, machine learning
and high-performance computing of big data.
Barbara P. Buttenfield is Professor of Geography at University of Colorado-Boulder, a Faculty
Research Affiliate at U.S. Geological Survey’s Center for Excellence in Geospatial Science. She is Direc-
tor of the Meridian Lab, a small campus research facility working on projects relating to visualization
and modeling of geographic information and technology. Her research focuses on multi-scale geos-
patial database design, uncertainty representation in environmental modeling, and terrain analysis
for natural hazards response.
Tyler Brockmeyer is a Missouri University of Science and Technology Computer Science Graduate. He
worked for the U.S. Geological Survey in Rolla Missouri during the writing of this paper. Currently, he
is working for Bayer in their Crop Science division.
ORCID
Barry J. Kronenfeld
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9518-2462
Lawrence V. Stanislawski
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9437-0576
Barbara P. Buttenfield
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5961-5809
References
Attneave, F. (1954). Some informational aspects of visual perception. Psychological Review, 61,
183–193.
de Berg, M., van Kreveld, M., Overmars, M., & Schwarzkopf, O. (2000). Computational geometry:
Algorithms and applications (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Bose, P., Cabello, S., Cheong, O., Gudmundsson, J., van Kreveld, M., & Speckman, B. (2006). Area-pre-
serving approximations of polygonal paths. Journal of Discrete Algorithms, 4(4), 554–566.
Braden, B. (1986). The surveyor’s area formula. The College Mathematics Journal, 17(4), 326–337.
doi:10.2307/2686282
Buttenfield, B. P. (1985). Treatment of the cartographic line. Cartographica: The International Journal
for Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 22(2), 1–26.
Cromley, R. G. (1992). Principal axis line simplification. Computers & Geosciences, 18(8), 1003–1011.
Douglas, D. H., & Peucker, T. K. (1973). Algorithms for the reduction of the number of points required
to represent a digitised line or its caricature. Cartographica: The International Journal for
Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 10(2), 112–122.
Eppstein, D. (1994). Approximating the minimum weight Steiner triangulation. Discrete &
Computational Geometry, 11(2), 163–191. doi:10.1007/BF02574002.
Gary, R. H., Wilson, Z. D., Archuleta, C. M., Thompson, F. E., & Vrabel, J. (2010). Production of a national
1:1,000,000-scale hydrography dataset for the United States: Feature selection, simplification, and
refinement. Washington D.C.: U.S. Geological survey Scientific Invertigations Report 2009-5202
(revised 2010).
Gökgöz, T., Sen, A., Memduhoglu, A., & Hacar, M. (2015). A new algorithm for cartographic simplifica-
tion of streams and lakes using deviation angles and error Bands. ISPRS International Journal of
Geo-Information, 4, 2185–2204. doi:10.3390/ijgi4042185.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
23
Hangouët, J. F. (1995). Computation of the Hausdorff distance between plane vector polylines. Auto-
Carto XII: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Computer-Assisted Cartography, Charlotte,
North Carolina.
Kulik, L., Duckham, M., & Egenhofer, E. (2005). Ontology-driven map generalization. Journal of Visual
Languages & Computing, 16(3), 245–267.
Lee, D., & Hardy, P. (2005). Automating generalization – tools and models. Proceedings of XXII
International Cartographic Congress (ICC 2005), A Coruña, Spain.
Li, Z. (2006). Algorithmic foundations of multi-scale spatial representation. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Li, Z. (2007). Digital map generalization at the age of the enlightenment: A review of the first forty
years. The Cartographic Journal, 44(1), 80–93.
Li, Z., & Openshaw, S. (1992). Algorithms for automated line generalization based on a natural prin-
ciple of objective generalization. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 6(5),
373–389.
MacEachren, A. M. (1985). Compactness of geographic shape: Comparison and evaluation of
measures. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 67(1), 53–67.
McMaster, R. B. (1986). A statistical analysis of mathematical measures for linear simplification. The
American Cartographer, 13(2), 103–116.
McMaster, R. B., & Shea, K. S. (1992). Generalization in digital cartography. Washington, DC: Association
of American Geographers.
Meulemans, W., van Renssen, A., & Speckmann, B. (2010). Area-preserving subdivision schematiza-
tion. In S. I. Fabrikant, T. Reichenbacher, M. van Kreveld, & C. Schlieder (Eds.), Proceedings,
GIScience 2010, LCNS 6292 (pp. 160–174). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Mustiere, S. (2005). Cartographic generalization of roads in a local adaptive approach: A knowledge
acquisition problem. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 19(8–9), 937–955.
Nakos, B., Gaffuri, J., & Mustiere, S. (2008). A transition from simplification to generalisation of natural
occurring lines. Proceedings 11th ICA Workshop on Generaliszation and Multiple Representations,
Montpelier, France.
Nutanong, S., Jacox, E. H., & Samet, H. (2011). An incremental Hausdorff distance calculation algor-
ithm. 37th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Seattle, Washington.
Ramer, U. (1972). An iterative procedure for the polygonal approximation of plane curves. Computer
Graphics and Image Processing, 1(3), 244–256.
Raposo, P. (2013). Scale-specific automated line simplification by vertex clustering on a hexagonal
tessellation. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 40(5), 427–443. doi:10.1080/
15230406.2013.803707
Rucklidge, W. (1996). Efficient visual recognition using the Hausdorff distance. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
186 pp. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (1173).
Saalfeld, A. (1999). Topologically consistent line simplification with the Douglas-Peucker algorithm.
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 26(1), 7–18. Doi: 10.1559/15230409978242901
Samsonov, T. E., & Yakimova, O. P. (2017). Shape-adaptive geometric simplification of heterogeneous
line datasets. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 31(8), 1485–1520. doi:10.
1080/13658816.2017.1306864
Shahriari, N., & Tao, V. (2002). Minimising positional errors in line simplification using adaptive toler-
ance values. Proceedings, 34th symposium on geospatial theory, processing and applications,
Ottawa, Canada. Retrieved from http://www.isprs.org/proceedings/XXXIV/part4/pdfpapers/063.
pdf.
Shen, Y., Ai, T., & He, Y. (2018). A new approach to line simplification based on image processing: A
case study of water area boundaries. International Journal of Geo-Information, 7–41. doi:10.3390/
ijgi7020041.
Shi, W., & Cheung, C. (2006). Performance evaluation of line simplification algorithms for vector gen-
eralization. The Cartographic Journal, 43(1), 27–44. doi:10.1179/000870406X93490
Stanislawski, L. V. (2009). Feature pruning by upstream drainage area to support automated gener-
alization of the United States National Hydrography dataset. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 33(5), 325–333.
24
B. J. KRONENFELD ET AL.
Stanislawski, L. V., Buttenfield, B. P., Bereuter, P., Savino, S., & Brewer, C. A. (2014). Generalization oper-
ators. In D. Burghardt, C. Duchêne, & W. A. Mackaness (Eds.), Abstracting information in a data rich
world: Methodologies and applications of map generalization (pp. 157–195). Berlin: Springer Lecture
Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-00203-3
Stanislawski, L. V., Falgout, J., & Buttenfield, B. P. (2015). Automated extraction of natural drainage
density patterns for the conterminous united states through high-performance computing. The
Cartographic Journal, 52(2), 185–192. doi:10.1080/00087041.2015.1119466
Stanislawski, L. V., Liu, Y., Buttenfield, B. P., Survila, K., Wendel, J., & Okok, A. (2016). High performance
computing to support multiscale representation of hydrography in the conterminous United
States. Proceedings, 19th ICA workshop on generalization and multiple representation, June 14,
2016, Helsinki, Finland, 10 p.
Töpfer, F., & Pillewizer, W. (1966). The principles of selection. The Cartographic Journal, 3(1), 10–16.
Tutić, D., & Lapaine, M. (2009). Area preserving cartographic line generalization. Journal of the
Croatian Cartographic Society, 8(11), 84–100.
U.S. Bureau of the Budget. (1947). United States National Map accuracy standards, June 17.
U.S. Geological Survey. (2017). The National Hydrography dataset. Production dates 2002-2017.
Retrieved from https://nhd.usgs.gov/data.html, Last visited 03/17/2017.
Visvalingam, M., & Whyatt, J. D. (1992). Line generalisation by repeated elimination of the smallest
area. Discussion paper 10, Cartographic Information Systems Research Group (CISRG), The
University of Hull.
Wang, Z., & Müller, J.-C. (1998). Line generalization based on analysis of shape characteristics.
Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 25(1), 3–15.
Zhou, S., & Jones, C. B. (2005). Shape-aware line generalisation with weighted effective area. In P. F.
Fisher (Ed.), Developments in Spatial Handling 11th International Symposium on Spatial Handling
(pp. 369–380). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CARTOGRAPHY
25
